In this video I'm going to tell you about the difference between linear least based numbers and logarithmic
least based numbers.
And in the exercise you will see that linear functions are generally good approximations of nonlinear
functions at close distances.
This turns out to be a really important observation for many areas of applied mathematics in particular
in engineering and that is because nonlinear functions can be difficult.
They can be a little bit hairy sometimes are hard to work with but linear functions are generally always
straightforward and easy to implement.
So if you wanted to count between 1 and 5 probably the way you would go about doing that is to say 1
2 3 4 5.
Now this is a linear scale and what characterizes a linear scale is that the space between each successive
count or increment is the same.
So the distance between 1 and 2 is the same as the distance between 2 and 3 and 3 and 4 and 4 and 5.
Now that's not surprising because that's sort of how you learned how to count.
That's how you count your whole life but logger rhythmically space numbers.
So log counting between 1 and 5 actually gives slightly different answers.
So here you go one and then two one point five then two point two three point three and then up to five.
Now notice that the distance between each successive number each successive count is not the same.
In fact the distances are increasing.
So from one to one point five we go one half but from one point five to two point two.
That's a distance of point seven.
From here to here is a distance of one point one and three point three to five is a distance of one
point seven.
So in fact the distance between this number and this number is three times larger than the distance
between this number and this number.
And that is characterizing logarithmic least spaced scales to implement linear and nonlinear counting
in Python.
You can use the NUM pi module and the map plot lib.
Gonna be useful for the exercise.
So in fact I've already introduced you to creating linearly spaced numbers.
That is the function Lynn space in the NUM pi module and generally the way you use Lin space is to input
three numbers.
So you start with the lower bound and then the upper bound and then the number of numbers so the number
of linearly evenly spaced numbers between the lower bound and the upper bound.
And let's say that's about 10.
Okay.
So here we get linearly space numbers between 1 and 5.
So let's say and actually to facilitate the next discussion I'm going to change this to 2.
So now we have 10 linearly spaced numbers between 1 and 2.
So now let's try this with log space so to get logarithmic space numbers you use the function log space
and now the function works kind of similarly.
So we start with the lower bound and the upper bound.
And then the number of numbers between them.
However when you look at this output I don't know it looks wrong doesn't it.
Looks like a different output from what you probably would have expected.
So in this case we wrote 1 and 2 as the lower and upper bounds.
But what came out was 10 to a hundred.
Now if you have your thinking cap on which I always recommend when learning math and and coding then
you might notice that there is a relationship between these numbers and these two numbers.
And in fact this first number is 10 to the power of 1.
And this last number is 10 to the power of 2.
And that is not a coincidence that is exactly how the log space function works so it's going to take
10 logarithmic leased space numbers not between the first input and the second input but between 10
to the power of the first input and tend to the power of the second input.
So in fact what you really want to do is something like NPD dot log 10 of 1 and then log 10 of 2 like
this.
And this is going to give you the expected result.
Now in my opinion this is a little bit confusing.
We're starting to get to a bunch of embedded functions here so I generally like to set things up like
this.
I would say a equals so one variable equals this and then we have B equals log 10 of 2 and then you
write a and b here.
Now in my opinion this looks a little bit cleaner.
Of course that gives you exactly the same result in the end.
As I mentioned in the beginning of this video the exercise for this video is to show that a linear scale
approach is a logarithmic scale as the boundaries approach each other.
So this is quite a mouthful.
What does this mean.
Let's actually start just by looking at the picture and asking the question Do these two lines approximate
each other.
Are they almost the same thing.
Now I'm sure you agree that the answer is no they don't look like they're the same thing.
They do start and end at the same points but they certainly look very different from each other.
Now these two boundaries are pretty far apart.
I think this was two and this was one hundred and what you want to do in this exercise is first generate
a plot that looks like this and then move these boundaries closer and closer to each other.
And what you will discover is that as these boundaries get closer and closer the linear scale is a better
and better approximation of this non-linear function.
All right.
So now is the time to pause the video because I am going to switch to Python and start showing you my
solution here.
All right.
So let's say the boundaries go from a which is two to B which is a hundred.
And I'm going to specify 50 points between these two boundaries.
So now I want linearly spaced numbers between a and b.
That's NPR.
Lin space a b and N.
Because I want end of them.
And then the logarithmic Lee space numbers will be and Peter long space.
I remember this was slightly more confusing we have to go and P. log 10 of a do it.
Num pi log ten of B and then there are going to be end of these guys as well.
All right.
So this generates the numbers the sequences.
And now we just need to plot them so let's say plot.
Now the x axis actually is the input so I'm gonna write I'm going to specify that the x axis should
also be l I and then apply for the Y.
So this is going to be label is linear and then we have P L teed up plot L I dot l 0 for logarithmic
these base numbers and this is going to be log let's see.
Then we need to activate the legend and show the plot.
Okay so let's see how this looks actually it looks a little bit stretched out.
I think I'm also gonna make the axis square.
Okay.
So this looks pretty good except I think the colors are reversed from what I showed in the slides but
that doesn't matter.
The labels are correct.
So that's the most important thing.
Now what I'm going to do is move these boundaries to be closer to each other.
And what you will see is that the straight lines of the linear function looks more and more like the
logarithmic scaling as the boundaries get close to each other.
So let's try.
How about 30 and 70.
All right.
So you can already see that the distance between these two lines is smaller.
Let's go for 40 and 60.
About fifty.
All right.
Getting closer and let's make this 50 even closer.
How about even forty five which isn't even that close together.
These aren't like super close together and still you can see that the lines are nearly entirely overlapping.
And again the important point here is that linear functions are actually really good close approximations
to nonlinear functions as the distances gets really small.
And again that fact becomes really important for applications of mathematics in particular in engineering
and physics in simulations.
So in this video you learned about log scale and linear scale or log spaced and linearly spaced numbers
and you got to see a demonstration of how linear functions are good approximations of nonlinear functions
at close boundaries.